I am Lesya Ukrainka, born in
1871, in Novograd-Volynsky,
Ukraine. I am a poet, dramatist, short-story
writer, essayist, and critic who was the
foremost woman writer in Ukrainian literature
and a leading figure in its modernist movement.
I am a daughter of intellectuals. I was stricken
with tuberculosis in 1881 and traveled widely
thereafter in search of a cure. My early
lyrical verse, influenced by Taras Shevchenko,
dealt with the poet’s loneliness and social
alienation and was informed by a love of freedom,
especially national freedom. The
collections named "On the Wings of Songs”,
“thoughts and Dreams” and “Echoes” established me
as the leading young Ukrainian poet of the day.
I was active in the Ukrainian struggle
against tsarism and joined Ukrainian
Marxist organizations, translating the
Communist Manifesto into Ukrainian in 1902.
In 1907 I was arrested and, following my release,
was kept under observation by the tsarist police.
I concentrated on poetic dramas from about
1906. My plays were inspired by various
historical milieus. Folk songs and fairy tales
provide the framework for my works as well.
My writings reflected the timeless tension
between exalted ideals and sordid reality.
Fiction has a special place
in my literary heritage.
The first stories from rural life are connected
in content and language with folk songs. My poems
and plays contributed to the establishment of
many aspects within the Ukrainian societies.
My involvement in political, civil, and
feminist activism was also significant
in founding modernized Ukrainian literature
for our ongoing struggle for independence.
My blade shall sever the fetters of iron
and echo aloud in the forts of all tyrants.